Update paper (#974)
alan-turing-institute/autoemulate: paper/paper.md

# Statement of need

Physical systems are often modelled using computer simulations, which can be computationally expensive and time-consuming to run. This computational bottleneck can be resolved by approximating simulations with emulators, often leading to significant speed-ups [@kennedy_ohagan_2000].

Emulation requires significant expertise in machine learning as well as familiarity with a broad and evolving ecosystem of tools. This creates a barrier to entry for domain researchers whose focus is on the underlying scientific problem. AutoEmulate [@autoemulate] lowers the barrier to entry by automating the entire emulator construction process (training, hyperparameter tuning and model selection). This makes emulation accessible to non-specialists while also offering a reference set of emulators for benchmarking to experienced users.

> AutoEmulate was originally built on scikit-learn, which is well suited for traditional machine learning but less flexible for complex workflows. AutoEmulate v1.0 introduced a PyTorch [@pytorch] backend that provides GPU acceleration for faster training and inference and automatic differentiation via PyTorch’s autograd system. The PyTorch refactor also enabled fast Bayesian model calibration (identifying input values most likely to have generated real-world observations) using gradient-based inference methods such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo exposed through Pyro [@pyro].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AutoEmulate was originally built on scikit-learn, which is well suited for traditional machine learning but less flexible for complex workflows. AutoEmulate v2.0 introduced a PyTorch [@pytorch] backend that provides GPU acceleration for faster training and inference and automatic differentiation via PyTorch’s autograd system. The PyTorch refactor also enabled fast Bayesian model calibration (identifying input values most likely to have generated real-world observations) using gradient-based inference methods such as Hamiltonian Monte Carlo implemented through Pyro [@pyro].
```

The latest version of AutoEmulate now also supports direct integration of custom simulators and active learning, in which the tool adaptively selects informative simulations to run to improve emulator performance at minimal computational cost. Additionally, the AutoEmulate refactor improved support for high-dimensional data through dimensionality reduction techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) and variational autoencoders (VAEs).

# State of the field

The primary motivation for developing AutoEmulate [@autoemulate] was to make emulation accessible to domain researchers who are not machine learning experts. It achieves this through a low-code interface and automated model selection, distinguishing it from other surrogate modelling tools such as SMT [@smt] or Emukit [@emukit].

> We further extended the capabilities of AutoEmulate to expose a range of downstream tasks in a single package. The comprehensive nature of the tool distinguishes it from more specialised packages. For example, SBI [@sbi] or BayesFlow [@bayesflow] can train emulators on simulated data and perform Bayesian calibration while Ax [@ax] or scikit-activeml [@skactiveml] support active learning. While these packages can offer more advanced tooling for a particular task, none of them cover as wide a range of emulation capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We further extended the capabilities of AutoEmulate to include a range of downstream tasks in a single package. The comprehensive nature of the tool distinguishes it from more specialised packages. For example, SBI [@sbi] or BayesFlow [@bayesflow] can train emulators on simulated data and perform Bayesian calibration, while Ax [@ax] or scikit-activeml [@skactiveml] support active learning. While these packages can offer more advanced tooling for a particular task, none of them cover as wide a range of emulation capabilities.
```

> More comprehensive uncertainty quantification toolkits such as OpenTURNS [@openturns] and PyApprox [@pyapprox] do offer broad emulation functionality but they require more expertise to configure. To our knowledge, no existing tool combines automated model selection and hyperparameter tuning with sensitivity analysis, calibration, and active learning in a single low-code package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More comprehensive uncertainty quantification toolkits such as OpenTURNS [@openturns] and PyApprox [@pyapprox] do offer broad emulation functionality, though automated comparison across emulator classes is left to the user. To our knowledge, no existing tool combines automated model selection and hyperparameter tuning with sensitivity analysis, calibration, and active learning in a single low-code package.
```

The latest version of AutoEmulate now also supports direct integration of custom simulators and active learning, in which the tool adaptively selects informative simulations to run to improve emulator performance at minimal computational cost. Additionally, the AutoEmulate refactor improved support for high-dimensional data through dimensionality reduction techniques such as principal component analysis (PCA) and variational autoencoders (VAEs).

# State of the field

The primary motivation for developing AutoEmulate [@autoemulate] was to make emulation accessible to domain researchers who are not machine learning experts. It achieves this through a low-code interface and automated model selection, distinguishing it from other surrogate modelling tools such as SMT [@smt] or Emukit [@emukit].

> We further extended the capabilities of AutoEmulate to expose a range of downstream tasks in a single package. The comprehensive nature of the tool distinguishes it from more narrowly focused packages. For example, SBI [@sbi] or BayesFlow [@bayesflow] can train emulators on simulated data and perform Bayesian calibration while Ax [@ax] or scikit-activeml [@skactiveml] support active learning, but none of these cover as wide a range of emulation capabilities.

Author: ```suggestion
We further extended the capabilities of AutoEmulate to expose a range of downstream tasks in a single package. The comprehensive nature of the tool distinguishes it from more specialised packages. For example, SBI [@sbi] or BayesFlow [@bayesflow] can train emulators on simulated data and perform Bayesian calibration while Ax [@ax] or scikit-activeml [@skactiveml] support active learning. While these packages can offer more advanced tooling for a particular task, none of them cover as wide a range of emulation capabilities.
```

# Research Impact Statement

> In the last year, we have collaborated with experts across diverse domains. These collaborations have driven software development through feature requests and bug reports. For example, we implemented a full end-to-end calibration workflow used by collaborators in cardiac modelling, which utilises sensitivity analysis, history matching and Bayesian calibration. We demonstrate how to use AutoEmulate in patient calibration pipelines in one of our [case studies](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/autoemulate/tree/main/case_studies). Similarly, we have worked with domain experts in signals processing, which led to the implementation of interval excursion set calibration. This work was presented in a poster at OFEME2025. We have also had contributors outside the core development team responding to existing issues and adapting the tool for their own use cases (e.g., contributing new types of emulators).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the last year, we have collaborated with experts across diverse domains. These collaborations have driven software development through feature requests and bug reports. For example, we implemented a full end-to-end calibration workflow used by collaborators in cardiac modelling, which utilises sensitivity analysis, history matching and Bayesian calibration. We demonstrate how to use AutoEmulate in patient calibration pipelines in one of our [case studies](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/autoemulate/tree/main/case_studies). Similarly, we have worked with domain experts in signal processing, which led to the implementation of interval excursion set calibration. This work was presented in a poster at OFEME2025. We have also had contributors outside the core development team responding to existing issues and adapting the tool for their own use cases (e.g., contributing new types of emulators).
```
